---
title: Alpine Linux does not make the news
date: 2023-07-25
---

My Linux distribution of choice for several years has been [Alpine Linux][0].
It's a small, efficient distribution which ships a number of tools I appreciate
for their simplicity, such as musl libc. It has a very nice package manager,
apk, which is fast and maintainable. The development community is professional
and focuses on diligent maintenance of the distribution and little else. Over
the years I have used it, very little of note has happened.

[0]: https://alpinelinux.org/

I run Alpine in every context; on my workstation and my laptops but also on
production servers, on bare-metal and in virtual machines, on my RISC-V and ARM
development boards, at times on my phones, and in many other contexts besides.
It has been a boring experience. The system is simply reliable, and the upgrades
go over without issue every other quarter,[^2] accompanied by high-quality
release notes. I'm pleased to maintain several dozen packages in the
repositories, and the community is organized such that it is easy for someone
like me to jump in and do the work required to maintain it for my use-cases.

[^2]: Or more frequently on edge, which I run on my workstation and laptops and
    which receives updates shortly after upstream releases for most software.

Red Hat has been in the news lately for their moves to monetize the
distribution, moves that I won't comment on but which have generally raised no
small number of eyebrows, written several headlines, and caused intense
flamewars throughout the internet. I don't run RHEL or CentOS anywhere, in
production or otherwise, so I just looked curiously on as all of this took place
without calling for any particular action on my part. Generally speaking, Alpine
does not make the news.

And so it has been for years, as various controversies come about and die off,
be it with Red Hat, Ubuntu, Debian, or anything else, I simply keep running "apk
upgrade" every now and then and life goes on uninterrupted. I have high-quality,
up-to-date software on a stable system and suffer from no fuss whatsoever.

The Alpine community is a grassroots set of stakeholders who diligently concern
themselves with the business of maintaining a good Linux distribution. There is
little in the way of centralized governance;[^1] for the most part the
distribution is just quietly maintained by the people who use it for the purpose
of ensuring its applicability to their use-cases.

[^1]: There's some. They mostly concern themselves with technical decisions like
    whether or not to approve new committers or ports, things like that.

So, Alpine does not make the news. There are no commercial entities which are
trying to monetize it, at least no more than the loosely organized coalition of
commercial entities like SourceHut that depend on Alpine and do their part to
keep it in good working order, alongside various users who have no commercial
purpose for the system. The community is largely in unanimous agreement about
the fundamental purpose of Alpine and the work of the community is focused on
maintaining the project such that this purpose is upheld.

This is a good trait for a Linux distribution to have.
