---
date: 2020-02-15
layout: post
title: Status update, February 2020
tags: ["status update"]
---

Today I thought it'd try out something new: I have an old family recipe
simmering on the stove right now, but instead of beef I'm trying out impossible
beef. It cooked up a bit weird &mdash; it doesn't brown up in the same way I
expect of ground beef, and it made a lot more fond than I expected. Perhaps the
temperature is too high? We'll see how it fares when it's done. In the
meanwhile, let's get you up to speed on my free software projects.

First, big thanks to everyone who stopped by to say "hello" at FOSDEM! Putting
faces to names and getting to know everyone on a personal level is really
important to me, and I would love FOSDEM even if that was all I got out of it.
Got a lot of great feedback on the coming plans for SourceHut and aerc, too.

That aside, what's new? On the Wayland scene, the long-promised Sway 1.3^W1.4
was finally released, and with it wlroots 0.10.0. I've been talking it up for a
while, so I won't bore you by re-listing all of the cool stuff in this release -
it'll suffice to say that I think you'll enjoy it. The related tools &mdash;
swayidle, swaylock, swaybg &mdash; all saw releases around the same time. The
other release this month was scdoc 1.10.1, which was a simple patch release.
Beyond releases, there's been some Wayland development work as well: wev
received a simple bugfixes, and casa's OpenGL-based renderer rewrite has been
completed nicely.

aerc progresses nicely this month as well, thanks to the support of its many
dedicated contributors. Many bugfixes have landed, alongside contextual
configuration options &mdash; so you can have different config settings, for
example, when you have an email selected whose subject line matches a regex. A
series of notmuch patches should be landing soon as well. himitsu has also seen
slow progress &mdash; this pace being deliberate, as this is security-sensitive
software. Several bugs have been fixed in the existing code, but there are a few
more to address still. imrsh also had a little bit of improvement this month,
as I started down the long road towards properly working UTF-8 support.

SourceHut improvements have also landed recently. I did some work shoring up our
accessibility standards throughout the site, and SourceHut is now fully
complaint with the WCAG accessibility guidelines. We now score 100% on standard
performance, accessibility, and web standards compliance tests. SourceHut is the
lightest weight, most usable forge. I recently fixed a bug report from a Lynx,
user, too ðŸ˜‰ In terms of feature development, the big addition this month is
support for attaching files to annotated git tags, so you can attach binaries,
PGP signatures, and so on to your releases. More cool SourceHut news is coming
in the post to sr.ht-announce later today.

This month's update is a little bit light on content, I'll admit. Between FOSDEM
and taking some personal time, I've had less time for work this month. However,
there's another reason: I have a new secret project which I've been working on.
I intend to keep this project under wraps for a while still, because I don't
want people to start using it before I know if it's going to pan out or not.
This project is going to take a lot of time to complete, so I hope you'll bear
with me for a while and trust that the results will speak for themselves. As
always, thank you for your support, and I'm looking forward to another month of
awesome FOSS work.
