---
title: Status update, August 2021
date: 2021-08-15
---

Greetings! It's shaping up to be a beautiful day here in Amsterdam, and I have
found the city much to my liking so far. If you're in Amsterdam and want to grab
a beer sometime, send me an email! I've been making a lot of new friends here.
Meanwhile, I've also enjoyed a noticable increase in my productivity levels.
Let's go over the month's accomplishments.

First, I have spent most of my time on the programming language project. I
mentioned in the last update that we broke ground on a codegen rewrite, and
yesterday all of our tests finally passed and I merged it. The new design is
much better, and we should be able to simplify it even further still when we
write the <abbr title="The 'hosted' compiler is one that 'hosts' itself: it's written in our new programming language and compiles itself. This is contrasted with the 'bootstrap' compiler, which is written in C and is used for bootstrapping the hosted toolchain from scratch.">hosted compiler</abbr>
in the near future. This will also give us a better basis for a small number of
experiments we'd like to do before finalizing the language design. Some other
improvements include fleshing out our floating point math support library, a
base64 module, a poll module, and parallel DNS resolution.

In SourceHut news, we shipped the [lists.sr.ht GraphQL API][0]. Future work will
expand support for thread parsing and implement write operations. Presently, I
am also working on a design for GraphQL-native webhooks, targetting meta.sr.ht
for the initial release. sr.ht packages for Alpine 3.14 were now made available,
and planned maintenance two weeks ago was the first of two fleet-wide rollouts
of the upgrades to sr.ht hosted &mdash; the next is scheduled for tomorrow.

[0]: https://man.sr.ht/lists.sr.ht/graphql.md

These two projects are my primary focus right now, and they're both making good
progress. In the coming month, I hope to address a few language design questions
and build a more sophisticated I/O abstraction for the standard library. On
sr.ht, I plan on expanding the GraphQL-native webhooks prototype and hopefully
shipping it to one of the GQL APIs, along with starting on another major GQL
support movement &mdash; either write support for lists.sr.ht, or the initial
paste.sr.ht GQL API.

That's all I have to share today! Thanks for tuning in.
