---
title: I will be moving to the Netherlands
date: 2021-06-07
outputs: [html, gemtext]
---

I had been planning a move to the Netherlands for a while, at least until a
large COVID-shaped wrench was thrown into the gears. However, I was fully
vaccinated by early April, and there are signs of the border opening up now, so
my plans have been slowly getting back on track. I sent off my visa application
today, and assuming I can navigate the pandemic-modified procedures, I should be
able to make my move fairly soon. It's a little bit intimidating, but I am
looking forward to it!

*Quick note: I am looking for temporary housing in NL; somewhere I can stay for
6-12 months with a permanent mailing address for receiving immigration-related
documents. I would prefer to rent out a room than to use some kind of commercial
accommodation, to be certain that I can receive mail from the immigration
services for the duration of the process. [Please shoot me an email][0] if
you've got a lead! I'd rather meet someone through the FOSS community than dig
through ~~Craigslist~~ Marktplaats from overseas.*

[0]: mailto:sir@cmpwn.com

I have felt a kind of dissonance with my home country of the United States for a
long time now, and I have found it very difficult to resolve. I am not of one
mind with my peers in this country on many issues; social, economic, and
political. Even limiting this inquiry to matters related to FOSS, it's quite
clear that the FOSS community in Europe is much stronger than in America. In the
United States, capitalism is the secular religion, and my values, in FOSS and
otherwise, are incompatible with the American ethos.[^1]

[^1]: Bonus: as I'm writing this I can literally hear gunfire a couple of neighborhoods away. There have been an average of 1Â½ gun-related homicides per day in Philadelphia since January 1st, 2021.

Leaving the US is a selfish choice. I could stay here to get involved in solving
these problems, but I chose to leave for a place which has already made much
more progress on them. Ultimately, this is the only life I'm gonna get, and I
have decided not to spend it on politics. I'll spare you from the rest of the
details. I'll also acknowledge that I'm very privileged to even have this choice
at all. Because I know how difficult it is to leave, for reasons unique to each
person's own situation, I don't hold anyone who stays behind accountable for
their country's cruelties.[^2]

[^2]: To be clear, I'm under no illusions that the Netherlands is some kind of utopian place. I am well versed in the social, economic, and political issues they face. I'm also aware of the declining state of democracy and political unity throughout the world, which affects the EU as well. But, by my reckoning, it's a hell of a lot better than the US, and will remain so for the foreseeable future. At least I'll be able to sleep at night if the world goes tits up.

So, why the Netherlands? I considered many options. For instance, I am fluent in
Japanese, have an existing social network there, and understand their
immigration laws and process. However, as much as I love to visit, I'm not on
their cultural wavelength. Integration would pose a challenge. That said, I have
also spent a lot of time in the EU, which is a hot spot for the FOSS ecosystem.
Access to any EU country with a path to citizenship opens up access to the rest
of the EU, making it a very strong choice with lots of second choices easily
available.

The Netherlands is an attractive place in these respects. It is relatively easy
for me to obtain a visa there, for one, but it also ranks very highly in
numerous respects: social, economic, political, and basic happiness. I have many
friends in Europe and I won't have to worry too much about establishing a new
social network there.

There are also some risks. Housing is expensive and only getting more so. Also,
like the rest of the world, how NL will emerge from the crises of the pandemic
remains to be seen, and many countries are likely to suffer from long-term
consequences in all aspects of life. They are also already dealing with an
influx of immigrants, and it's quite possible that I will face some social and
legal challenges in the future.

Despite these and other risks, I am optimistic about this change. The path to
citizenship takes only five years, and after many careful inquiries into the
process, I believe my plans for getting there are on very solid footing. I have
been studying Dutch throughout much of the pandemic, and I'm not having much
trouble with it &mdash; I intend to achieve fluency. Integration is well within
my grasp. I expect to look back on this transition with confidence in a decision
well-made.

Leuk je te ontmoeten, Nederland!

Oh, and yes: I will be re-locating SourceHut, the incorporated entity, to the
Netherlands, and gradually moving our infrastructure over the pond. Details
regarding these plans will eventually appear on the [ops wiki][ops]. Users can
expect little to no disruption from the change.

[ops]: https://man.sr.ht/ops
